it's time to call the order and over
Inland wetlands and Water fores
Commission for November 4th 2024
we're g to have to
uh first start off by seating our
alternate Brad Kell right yes okay so be
a commissioner tonight with
us Brad
Kelly commissioner
[Music]
CH
probably we got a couple of things we
have
here
uh there's no changes to the order of
the
agenda
um we have to approve uh the minutes
from September
[Music]
10 the regular meeting minutes
um we could hold off on that too because
two of the AR there
okay Okay
we okay good no public
[Music]
comment public here
oh this is on is this being recorded
there's no there's
nobody all right uh and here we are we
want to uh
we've got a permit application
IWC number 2410 Eric Anderson town of
Andover for the B Bunker Hill load
replacement of an existing Bunker Hill
bridge over the
river e
should come up
sh put this
in try to put this in slideshow mode and
see if I can remember
everything about
notes all
right all right I'm Greg with post
Miller uh consultant the aison for this
town of Andover project to replace
Bridge
4583 uh which carries Bunker Hill Road
over hop River um it is a state DOT
administered project it's 100% ferally
funded um so just want to note that um
you know good information to the town um
that's
it project location I think you guys are
probably pretty aware across the street
Bunker Hill uh Road over hop River tenth
of a mile from Route Six probably two
times from
here here a aerial view see um Scotts
tree farm on the Southwest and that's
really the biggest property of note in
this rural
area all right so the purpose of the
project is the deterioration
condition of the multiple culber
structure there's rust and deterioration
below the water line perforations Bo
deflecting um in 2021 several storms uh
came in and actually a couple of them
over top of structure and you can see in
the the bottom picture there that some
of the roadway um was washed away and
temporary repairs were required so those
are in place in the current condition
going fast
the current condition is in this upper
slide where it's reduced to a single
Lane to keep people off the off the
shoulders um the temporary player
repairs in
place so uh it was originally built in
1960 it was rehabilitated
1988 which included adding a third uh
cover pipe there were only two to start
the one on the right see looks a little
different is the third cover pipe it's a
triple barrel as uh asphalt coated
corated metal pip Arch Clover uh
differing sizes they're all about 15 to
16 feet in diameter with reinforced
concrete head walls the average daily
traffic over the bridge is about 330
Vehicles the drainage area to the site
is 58 square miles which is decent
decent sized and it's currently under
design for design flows that contributes
to the over topping
all right so we got a couple pictures of
the of the bridge this is from
Downstream you can see some
sedimentation
Downstream this is uh Upstream so
looking Downstream that's the
inlet that's looking
Upstream um from the bridge Downstream
from the bridge there's the uh parking
area on the the left there which is the
north side for for Anglers and river
access this is top of the bridge showing
that it's it's stop controlled at this
point and you can see the parking area
for the river access as well and this is
looking the other way Scot Stree Farm
towards Route
Six so this project is located within a
FEMA 100e flood plane as well as a
regulated floodway the floodway is shown
as the the white quarter down the middle
and the the Shaded area is the 100e
flood plane um to note the the flood
plane here is quite wide several hundred
feet wider than the bridge you can see
the you know the bridge is pretty small
compared to the flood plane
here all right so this is uh this shows
the termination of Bank full width so um
ordinary had water is shown here as well
as uh was delineated by the certified
soil scientist um to know there's no in
the wetlands on site there's no
federally regulated or state regulated
weapons on site for the soil scientists
so just the water course uh the bank for
width is important in determining how we
size the bridge so Army Corps
recommends um sizing at least 1.2 times
bankful width or 20% greater than Bank
width to maintain a natural Channel
Through the bridge um which we're doing
for the proposed condition but just to
show you that this is measured you know
somewhere 63 64 65 the average um for
the Bank full width and that's shown
again here uh this is the
proposed Bridge replacement there a lot
of construction
information on this um you know on the
slide but uh what's important is that
we're removing the multiple opening
structure and replacing it with a clear
span natural bottom structure um opening
up for Hydraulics allowing a lot more
flow through the bridge it's uh it's 370
Square ft in the exist existing
condition and there's 700 and some odd
square feet in the in the proposed
condition so nearly doubling the
hydraulic opening that's
existing um this also allowed for raran
shelves to be constructed to allow
Critters to pass Wildlife to pass under
safely
um that black and
green yeah so you see how that the the
embankments go up underneath the bridge
and then they level off and there three
foot sections on each side so those
those sections are you know flat area
for the for wildlife to pass safely
without having to go over the
road um another thing to note is there's
rip wrap so you've got granular fill
with rip wrap on top on either side and
then a foot of natural stream bed
material on top of that so rip wrap will
see in the plan view on the embankments
for embankment protection and this a
based on velocity
calculations um for fhwa for for
stabilizing embankments and this and
through the bridge um the tow in you see
is creates like a wedge for uh scour
protection so that's you know with
Bridges failing these days that's pretty
important is you get the the uh the toe
below the design scour calculated and
that way it won't undermine the bridge
is the is the U guard is that going to
be open that yes the so the open Bridge
rail um allows really some relief for
over topping but it's uh the the roadway
will be updated for uh Federal standards
you know so the bridge Rail and there's
also guide rail that extends off the
four corners or I should say three
corners the South or the northwest side
is has a concrete end block and um wall
to to knock the block the access to the
the river access so the GU didn't extend
there's a concrete wall there instead on
that
side and it was one thing I notic you
wrote something you were changing the
angle one of the sides yeah so the West
yeah the West abutment is was kind of
skewed to the the channel and in the new
configuration it will be
parallel they just straight North and
South I think the first time right right
so this this is now in line with the
river it's allow natural
flow that's it but keep the questions
easier probably to do while we go
through um so here proposed s plan you
can see the regulatory lines or near
have water is red the light blue is the
flood way and the dark blue is flood
plane you can see the rip wrap um
showing here on the embankments it's um
you know covers the the new embankment
to stabilize the new embankment since it
is we are widening out there's going to
be new Banks there um it's you know we
need to protect that bank from failing
it in a
flood so it it is FEMA that determines
the 100e flood yeah so they ones that
responsible for changing it it needs to
be changed the the female lines here are
based on the current FEMA firm so that's
what we're showing is the flood way and
flood plan lines their elevations based
off of the FEMA um firm map yeah um FEMA
yeah is well I think the town is
actually responsible for um each town is
responsible for updating FEMA burms so
it's
a yeah it's a it's a kind big topic dive
into it but uh the it is um you
know administered and overseen by the
town so if there was a a map revision
for you know if this project raised you
know if there was a project that raised
the elevation of the floodway you had to
go get a a FL of map vision it would be
kept on record at at the town and so if
somebody from basic you know wants to
look that up online
basically the town has to provide that
publicly but here we do not have an
increase it is um something we
definitely try to avoid with that you
know the big hydraulic opening is you
feel a slightly decrease in the right
yeah so to facilitate uh the
construction and demolition demolition
of the existing structure and
construction of the new structure
there'll be two stages of water handling
so we've got the two pipes on the right
side you can see with the the uh Dash
lines can see that that they're
separated as three the two arrows are
actually going through the northern
pipes so water handling will be put in
place to confine the western side to
allow removal of that Western pipe as
well as the substructure so first the
before water handlings ever put in place
they'll remove the the top of the
structure the the deck and um we'll do
that with a debris Shield so nothing
falls into the river although that's not
really it's a little different here uh
with with the covers but they will um so
remove probably some of the roadway but
here they'll put in uh the contractor
will put in water handling and remove
the West Pipe and remove the the
substructure um and that'll all be done
behind confinement and then dry um
settling basins will be in place to not
allow a sediment to run into the river
there'll be um sediment en Rion control
you can see is the the lines on you know
the South
Side the line with the block going
through it and temporary watering Bas in
the upper left
there
um so yeah that's the first stage second
stage you flip it so
um the newly constructed abutment uh
that will have gone in in the first
stage so first is removed and then also
construct the the uh new abutment and so
now you have a wider opening to the west
side is the the abutment on the uh this
is the South Side the left side is
further back for the the new abutment
and then we'll install new uh flip the
water handling so that the rest of uh
the structures in the drying can be
removed as well as removing the the
substructure and same thing uh install
abutments there actually piles that be
driven into Bedrock which is is for
scour as well and uh the new stream bed
will be formed and the rip wrap will be
placed to protect the
embankments
question I'm curious about and practices
and you mentioned
files I imagine
[Music]
Beed a lot of that up with the
contractor and you know methods and um
how they're going to do it so once the
contract is selected they will come up
with the plan and that'll have to be
um acceptable to the engineer but
uh the dewatering is you know there's
settling Basin place um put place with
the
the uh water handling will be put in
place will be sandbags or copper Dam or
be copper D be sandbags or
sheeting um this case it's looking like
you get we can get away with sandbags
but that's going to be up to the the
contractor and so that area is dewatered
through a sediment Basin and um it'll
need to be kept as a dry area in that um
confinement you know will be in place
the the duration
of the uh insulation of the piles and
the
ab that kind answer for
you one more
information
discharge what you mean they're like the
river they're discharging the
so if they need to
dewater um to dry out the area where
they're working yeah right so they
[Music]
would pum it
out Bas right yeah I'm picturing they
would discharge that directly to the
river then but I don't know I haven't
read through the documents yet that's
recommended I was just curious yeah so
um for yeah the the water course area
would go directly to the water course
and outside basically above ordinary H
water would be dewatered through Bas
that Mak sense
y so when that's when that is put up the
after they take the old structur out and
they're constructing the new structure
is that above the water level when
they're reconstruction that yep so
typically the the water heing is
designed for the 2year storm so um it'll
be high enough so that the river can
flow through in that temporary condition
um up to a two-year storm and typically
this is done during the summer so it
should be during low flow periods so we
try to get in and out as quickly as
possible while it's you know low flow
and avoid you know fish
spawning things
[Music]
all right so here's
a um results of the impacts uh so we got
just under 5,000 square fet of water for
impacts there are no Wetland impacts
there are no Wetlands on site um there's
1300 square feet of temporary which is
basically due to the the temporary water
handling and you see that uh in the
light pink there um where that's
separated two stages but it's in you
know we're showing all of the impacts at
once so that'll be happen in two
different stages but that is that's all
the impacts and the permanent impacts
are for you know the necessary removal
of the culverts and the installation of
the
substructure you know and rip
wrap stabilization below ordinary
water flood plane impacts uh the
the whole site is just about within the
flood PL except to the South there's um
there's there's some disturbance that's
not uh that's beyond the flood plane
lines but um you know this is basically
Army Corps jurisdiction flood plane um
much more cut here because of removing
the the pipes from the water force and
um widening out the bridge so a lot of
cut going from there um no impacts
expected back
expecting the the the uh the Water
course to and hydraulics to run mus
efficiently is it gonna since it doesn't
have the puls in it is it going to
change the speed of while the water not
anymore is actually um it's a slight
rise U but the the Hydraulics are
surprisingly similar in the 100-year
design event um and and the higher
events because of the flood plane width
so because the 100 years is so wide that
um basically wave of um that all of that
water that is several hundred fets to
the to the north is not very affected by
that 80 foot opening U so we went from
about 50 feet of opening with the three
openings to an 80 foot opening in the
proposed condition and that versus
several hundred feet does not impact the
Hydraulics substantially the the 10year
currently overtops the the roadway to
the north um it's probably know the the
low point and uh that doesn't happen in
the existing I mean in the proposed
condition so there's there's some
reduction in the um in the water surface
and so with that reduction of water
surface you get a slight rise on the
velocity but it's like on the order of
you know a 10th of a foot per second so
it's really not going to be noticeable
so view area uh Town regulated areas
within 200 feet of ordinary high water
line HP River um all the activity on the
site is within 200 feet so all the
disturbance here is within the up review
area um it's necessary to complete the
Bridge Project there's a lot of time in
review spent with do and The Regulators
to minimize the impacts as much as
possible impacts right away impacts with
water course and uh
and you know the the majority of this is
in the existing footprint of the the
existing Road and and
Bridge erosion sediment control we've
kind of talked about a little bit U
it'll follow all of the the state best
management practices storm um storm
quality manual um Connecticut D
guidelines for soil erosion
sedimentation uh sedimentation control
guidelines all be confined within
sedimentation control devices the uh Sim
sedimentation control will be tied into
the toe slopes of the water handling so
it is um completely
confined uh and the Disturbed areas at
the end of the project will be all
stabilized and
restored so as part of this project over
the last several years we've had a lot
of coordination with especially deep in
Army Corps but um various Regulatory
Agencies
um part of deep Fisheries coordination
is no unconfined work uh will be allowed
in the water during um June 1st from
June 1st to September 30th and that's
protect fish spawning so it has to be
100% fine during that
time um at the end of the project the
fishing and parking or the river access
and fishing access on the Eastern or
Northeastern side of the crossing will
be uh maintained so it'll be reopened it
will actually be closed during
construction for
safety
um the and we're of course replacing the
multiple opening Culver with the clear
spane fish
passage uh the state and federal species
of concern being U plant and animal
there's we've gotten there's actually
quite a bit of animals and and uh plants
as well but uh Eastern B Turtle wood
turtle hog no steak smooth green snake
have all been
identified and uh met with a qualified
herpetologist um a reptile amphibian guy
in Bruner um several times on site and
he has had to um provide a mitigation
plan uh that'll be in the contract
documents and he'll be providing sweeps
of all the animals um priate
construction during construction and uh
I think all that's been provided in the
documentation um because of bats it's
federal state bats no tree clearings
allowed between April 15 and May 31st so
that'll happen sometime before April
15th um golden Club as a plant species
that was
identified by deep but was not found on
site in initial visits and the other
thing that we've done is met with State
historic preservation tribal
consultation to make sure that there's
no resor or tribal areas affected as
part of the project and that the
termination been was completed in 20122
and we've gotten the so the approval to
move forward with with deep as well a
couple questions yeah first I did go
down there to to take a look and there's
a lot of trees take f are those all
going
down uh probably not it's probably just
the ones that are close by yeah there's
some that would be uh needed for
wetlands and and water course so that
may be it that you know if it's within
the product area then it'll be the the
trees that are coming down I don't know
if they've already marked that off but
that may
be marking out exclusionary F I haven't
been down
there there are a lot of trees I I just
the way change is almost seems like you
might have to cut I'm not sure yeah and
with that golden Club nobody actually
seen any
there is there you
know did that plant
be plant can we plant something in there
or is that like it's it's endangered so
I'm not I'm not
sure whatever you know it's like one of
these things keep popping up if you get
it introduce it yeah I mean instead of
going back and forth if you end up going
back and forth with the bot say Oh I
thought I S and said no I didn't see any
because that's the way this reading was
it's like one person was saying oh I saw
it's a place where they have been
cited so it's it's identified think by
an area on the national diversity
database Maps so the the Deep um map so
it's an area that based on conditions
for the site right you know it has a
possibility so then we send out a you
know qualified Bist go out there and
search the site and uh they they didn't
find anything in
there somebody was down there found one
definitely want
to that's what
they chance it's the place that they
would gr right yeah was it growing
no be checking again before and don't
this year when the time period when they
were doing that surve was when all the
rain so the water was like three or four
ft higher than it should be or even more
all almost all
Sumer and so yeah maybe there's none
there because they're all been washed
away or you know they just couldn't make
it this year yeah but that kind of come
next year yeah um not so I'm sure when
those when wear those plants it's you
know I think that they that the Bess
goes out during the time that they
should be there you know whatever
conditions to be check and and U you
know they'll be protected or um what I'm
looking I was trying to think about is
like instead of going back and for and
saying somebody actually say I saw one
in there and now you know I don't see it
anymore that kind of
thing why can't we just put some in
after we're done yeah I don't know
that's I don't know if we can can you do
that can you cut some of that up and put
it out there just say okay well you
might have K of doing what we did right
here we go mitigate
yeah I mean instead of like the other
battle that could ensue you know like
you got to have a b out here every
daying on yeah
like well they I mean they' completed
this point what's necessary for deep to
be satisfied which is you know what on
the process to get it all written up and
you know surveyed and so at this point
they're you know satisfied that they're
not there and I think that they be an
additional followup oh they want
yeah
yeah all right so finally project
permitting um the because it's in a
flood plane and a floodway there's
required flood management certification
through deep and do which has already
been issued uh we received approval for
the um Army Corps General permit uh will
be issued upon awarded contract which is
pretty soon bit opening was just
recently so um the last permit that we
need is from is is in the W permitting
so
um I think that's that's the remaining
thing project so the project is is due
to uh start in
or in this in the fallowing
season so in the spring of
25 Spring and 25
yeah I know you guys have a a lot of CR
I see you can't go between a lot of
months I can't remember that this one's
not too bad really compared to some
title stuff where you got a two- Monon
window and the in the winter to get a
project yeah so but yeah the B
restrictions for tree cutting is is
really new it's new this year new
species have been identified that
they're trying to protect from um you
know roosting issues so that actually
part of this project we that just came
up
recently I had to seen that before
yeah yeah know
yes been the last 6 months last yeah I
that's cuz we had the big bat die off
from
yeah well there was something last year
there was
a there was something going through the
B population oh yeah
yeah yeah and the
white white a lot of BS
to yeah so you're looking at starting in
Spring of next year yep and then
completing at the end of the sew in fall
in the fall 25 okay yeah so one yes one
construction season is spring and fall
cool with most of the inwater work
should be during something
mons it's plan cool yeah when are they
going shut the Bas break
down when are they going to shut it down
CL that road you know do they have so
they'll shut it down before they start
doing the um basically the the water
handle can do some work yeah be yeah
temporary utility relocation and
uh staging and everything right y
yeah have a bottle of
[Music]
champagne uh they just had a bid opening
this week so contractors Bid And The
Selection so award doesn't come for
another couple months so they've got
bids and they have to make termination
the contractors and they'll be a third
party um inspector that is really hired
by the town so responsible to the town
to inspect the the
contract may have been already done
but that's there could still
[Music]
here but yeah
yeah any other
questions any
question thanks for listening to me
ramble um so how does it work you guys
is do approval
happen next weeks you've got to
[Music]
deliberate lot time for
public comment right
heing and then yeah it's like 14 days so
still
next the next meeting okay de second is
our next meeting okay so that's when you
side all right okay thank
very you sh
can I grab theum
oh all right
I
just couple things had the um pending
permit last I issued it on oober
31st U was for this uh 365 l Road where
they replace the existing gravel
driveway with PA driveway the same size
um and
then there was another one that I just
got today which was the same company 69
Burn Road um where they're doing a PVE
driveway over gra and there a woss that
so get a permit for that
um have any questions on those what
happened with this one on Le Road I mean
um did they do it first not yet no they
didn't do it no they
actually didn't put in for anything but
we um our Public Works guy he gets the
call before
notification know going on there Chas
per
yeah so we that and then there wasn't
really
a ton of alternatives for this one
because it was weird because the
driveway sloped down and then the storm
drain like right at the bottom of it
which goes into goes across the road
into
Lake
um but you couldn't really grade it like
if gr into the neighbor jar onto their
D kind kind that's not very yeah and
then there was talk with zoning of
whether or not nutrient allocation
worksheet I don't know if you're
familiar with that um the planning zone
commission adopted a few years ago so
anything in Lake Area different zones
you had to um mitigate any so if you had
a per service like
that but right now it doesn't seem like
they were discussing whether or not
that Z if they had the authority
toire oh um
and then they would
have
dryw to collect the
water so who's trying to figure out if
they have that
Authority Jim house loing agent and then
Jed he was talking about it because he's
chair of
commission and then we have a new new
zoning agent
training um so they they
oh they didn't they weren't the ones
that put the the new things into place
they were yeah so who's actually
questioning that them they're
questioning themselves they're confusing
they're confusing regulations I actually
have a copy on it I don't know look at
them it's it's interesting because it
applies it like
um
overs oh charger so it's like I have to
require the wait for them to finish that
because they require all this mitigation
change as well oh I so I kind of work
with figure out what works
best it's kind of weird because
it's oh yeah
they definitely
need a weird worksheet and it's like a
dry is this this many they do with like
phosphorus renewable but each thing like
a UL bed is this much of grass is as
much this much there's no real specifics
you know that's what I was it's like put
a Dy build
dri you know need a container
build
side none of that so you can put a dry
that s useless
right so yeah
that something we could refer docents we
here the beginning
ref
[Music]
has yeah if it was constructed in
importance with their manag practice
right get because it's your requirement
we had
one where they require electrician to do
it because we had enough Renovations
inside the house to trigger that so it's
like why how you you
gotri trying to construct like a
drainage system it's out there
sh
there rard it's kind weird yeah yeah it
is well it might
help yeah might help well just keeping
free flow like you said right at the end
of the dve it's not going to be graving
it's just going to move right through
that drain the lake yeah and it's it's
an old gravel driveway and mean I think
there
as perious
anymore anymore oh
it's yeah just it's almost the same it's
almost the same yeah it's a flat pretty
flat yeah it's not
real yeah
and then I was I was the other one was
the over the
church
truck remove the
F the Big
File did they put any don't signed up
for one anywhere I didn't see any but I
I Pi a few pictures
get back see if they had any more PL now
these are down see everything
better that
vegetation all go well yeah I don't did
they did they do it yet
I hear they didn't they must have done
before yeah because they draw
yeah
yeah so they must have just I didn't see
J I didn't see him out the water I saw
there a
weeko yeah written into the
permit per
tonight
came never heard anything
about well at least they didn't put
the
yeah I think it affected me I went for S
and my eyes I was M for like a week
[Music]
really I'm not saying it was that but I
don't I kind of
yeah
I'm maybe that something else could have
been
[Music]
thato that's let's see our next regular
meeting is Monday December 2nd
o' I have a motion to
adone meeting at
751 I'll
second all in
fav
sure it like twice
you
had
yeah put everything
out yeah you don't
have through all that oh yeah well that
I'm really glad find some of that stuff
especially sare all that I didn't
all so I
[Music]
do that 100 Year BL you know that's
something thing
100 yeah is
different for us we like there confusion
a lot of times with us it's like flood
planes are regulated Wetland but it's if
there enough deposition so it has to
flood you
know enough to
so